SPORT AND WELLNESS FACILITIES AND SERVICES USAGE POLICY
SPORT AND WELLNESS FACILITIES AND SERVICES USAGE POLICY
1.0 Definitions
1.1 The following words and expressions have the meaning hereby assigned to them:
1.1.1
Academic Year
: The 12-month period defined in the University's Academic Calendar, as approved by the Board.
1.1.2
Alumnus
: a former student of the University, who successfully graduated.
1.1.3
Extended Community Access Hours
: Hours beyond the Sport and Wellness Operation Hours that offer opportunities to all User Groups to reserve Sport and Wellness Facilities and enroll in available Sport and Wellness Services.
1.1.4
External Community
: members of the general public, who are not from the University Community.
1.1.5
Facilities Management
: A University Directorate responsible for providing campus security, high quality facilities and support services to members of the University Community and visitors to the University, accomplished through international standards of customer care, concern for the environment and diligence in addressing the occupational health and safety needs of the campus community.
1.1.6
Guest Pass
: A restricted day usage option allowing participation in Sport and Wellness Services.
1.1.7
Immediate Family
: Specific members of the External Community, who are related to members of the University Community, and with regard to Academic Members and the University’s administrative staff they are - the spouses and children; and with regard to Students, they are - siblings, spouses, and children (under 21) of any full-time Student.
1.1.8
Outreach Efforts
: Sport and Wellness facility reservations and service registrations made available to all tiers of User Groups.
1.1.9
Registered Client
: An individual that completed the required registration process in order to take advantage of the Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services.
1.1.10
Semester
: A division of an Academic Year where a Student is enrolled in a Course(s) followed by an examination period.
1.1.11
Sport and Wellness(S&W)
: A department within Student Affairs tasked with the responsibility of coordinating, promoting and delivering sport, recreation, health and wellness activities for University Students, employees, Alumni, University Partners and where appropriate families in line with the University’s strategic objectives.
1.1.12
Sport and Wellness Facilities
: Spaces and equipment within the University’s campus operated by Sport and Wellness, including: Falcon turf field, events park (cricket, running track and natural grass field), fitness rooms, sport halls, studios, tennis/paddle courts, pools and others.
1.1.13
Sport and Wellness Operating Hours
: Hours where the University Community are given preference to reserve Sport and Wellness Facilities, enroll in Sport and Wellness Services, and invite guests on Guest Passes.
1.1.14
Sport and Wellness Programming
: Sport and Wellness offerings including activities, classes (educational and/or fitness related), competitions, events, wellness assessments, training sessions (personal development and/or sport / fitness related) as well as open and reserved facility access opportunities made available on a daily/ regular basis throughout the Academic Year.
1.1.15
Sport and Wellness Services
: Service offerings presented to User Groups by Sport and Wellness, including; wellness events and programming and sport tournaments, camps and academies.
1.1.16
Student
: A person who is presently enrolled at the University in a credit Course or who is designated by the University as a Student.
1.1.17
Student Employment Program
: Employment opportunities offered by the University to its Students throughout the academic year in various capacities (part-time & full-time).
1.1.18
University
: University of Doha for Science and Technology established by Emiri Resolution No. 13 of 2022.
1.1.19
University Community
: Academic Members, members of the administrative Staff, and/or Students.
1.1.20
University Partners
: companies and organizations whose collaboration with or support to the University, is regulated through written agreements with the University.
1.1.21
User Groups
: Students, Academic Members, University’s administrative staff, Alumni, University Partners, and the External Community.
1.1 Where the context requires, words importing the singular shall include the plural and vice-versa.
1.2 Where a word or phrase is given a particular meaning, other parts of speech and grammatical forms of that word or phrase have corresponding meanings.
2.0 Policy Purpose
2.1 The purpose of this policy is to outline terms and conditions for the use of University Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services to ensure that they are used efficiently and responsibly, in ways consistent with University priorities.
2.2 Enhance student co-curricular leadership and employment opportunities supported through mentorship, supervision and guidance of Sport and Wellness professional staff.
3.0 Policy Scope
3.1 This policy applies to all:
3.1.1 Internal and external users of University Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services.
3.1.2 Sport and Wellness Facilities
3.1.3 Sport and Wellness Services
4.0 Policy Statements
4.1 Principles
4.1.1 Sport and Wellness is responsible for ensuring the efficient and responsible usage of the Sport and Wellness Facilities and provision of Sport and Wellness Services by maximizing access to and usage of Sport and Wellness resources while maintaining operational standards and effective controls of User Groups
4.1.2 Access to and usage of Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services are offered primarily to Students, which is the priority focus of Sport and Wellness’ mandate.
4.1.3 The University, supporting its Academic Members and administrative staff in maintaining a balanced work and social life, will grant preferential consideration for the access to and usage of the Sports and Wellness Facilities and Services to its Academic Members, administrative staff and their Immediate Families subject to the relevant procedures.
4.1.4 The University, valuing its relationship with its graduates, will grant preferential consideration for the access to and usage of the Sports and Wellness Facilities and Services to its Alumni, subject to the relevant procedures.
4.1.5 The University seeks to enhance relationships with the families of current students and as such preferential usage consideration will be given to immediate families of current students, subject to the relevant procedures.
4.1.6 The University seeks to formalize partnering arrangements with organizations and institutions where mutual benefits can be identified and achieved.
4.1.7 Community focused usage of Sports and Wellness Facilities and Services is orchestrated on a cost recovery basis and takes into consideration current and existing market trends and fees for access to same or similar facilities and services.
4.1.8 Advancement of co-curricular learning through Student employment opportunities is recognized as an integral component of this policy.
4.1.9 University brand and reputation with the External Community will be elevated through Sport and Wellness Services.
4.2 Sport and Wellness Facility Access Considerations
4.2.1 The University will take reasonable and appropriate steps to control and validate physical access to Sport & Wellness Facilities and Services.
4.2.2 Access Priorities
4.2.2.1 Students are the priority beneficiaries of the Sport & Wellness Facilities and Services.
4.2.2.2 Access, preferential reservation and usage consideration to Sport & Wellness Facilities and Services is offered based on the tiers of priority and related scheduling considerations, as detailed in Annex A, subject to the relevant procedures.
4.2.3 General Campus Access
4.2.3.1 General access to the University campus is controlled by Campus Security, and is subject to the applicable University policies and procedures.
4.2.4 Sport and Wellness Access Areas
4.2.4.1 All users who have reserved a Sport and Wellness Facility and/or Service, should follow the specific instructions provided in their reservation/registration confirmation.
4.2.5 Access Control
4.2.5.1 In order to gain access to the Sport and Wellness Facilities and/or Services, users must satisfy access requirements mentioned in the relevant policies and procedures.
4.2.5.2 This policy will define the consideration for usage of Sport and Wellness Facilities and/or Services by User Groups during the Extended Community Access Hours, as detailed in Annex B, subject to the relevant procedures.
4.2.6 Reservation Verification
4.2.6.1 All members of the User Groups who have reserved a Sport and Wellness Facility are required to proceed through to the designated location (as directed in reservation confirmation) for verification and access.
4.3 Sport and Wellness Facility Usage Considerations
4.3.1 University facilities are dedicated to priorities identified in the University mandate.
4.3.2 The University may accommodate outreach efforts that do not conflict with priority facility usage.
4.3.3 Outreach Efforts are regulated to ensure no physical dangers to users or the possibility of damage to University facilities or equipment.
4.3.4 Sport and Wellness is responsible for ensuring that the required operation systems are in place to achieve appropriate implementation and management of the Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Policy [PL-ST-10] as is identified in the related Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedures (PR-ST-10).
4.4 Scheduling Considerations
4.4.1 Sport and Wellness is responsible for the operating and scheduling reservations of Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services with the exception of changes in the Sport and Wellness Operating Hours or Sport and Wellness Extended Community Access Hours (and related scheduling) impacting established Student services, which requires approval of the Vice-President, Student Affairs.
4.4.2 All usage of Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services requires pre-reservation via a streamlined, integrated online reservation system. The procedure to successfully reserve facilities and enrolls/register in offered services is identified in the related Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedures (PR-ST-10).
4.5 Staffing Requirements
4.5.1 An integral component of this policy is ensuring additional job opportunities for talented Students of the institution to support the expansion of Sport and Wellness Operating Hours and Services rendered to all User Groups. This policy serves to supplement the University’s Student Employment Program and aligns with established Student employment policies and procedures.
4.5.2 Employment and applied learning opportunities for Students, will be made available by Sport and Wellness, where feasible, in accordance with applicable Student employment policies and procedures.
4.6 Facility Monitoring
4.6.1 Sport and Wellness staff will regularly monitor adherence to Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services usage terms and conditions, and access requirements, criteria and priority, as defined in the related Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedures (PR-ST-10).
4.7 Reservation and Registrations
4.7.1 Creating a Registered Client Account
4.7.1.1 To gain access to the Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services, all users will be required to create a Registered Client account allowing the Sport and Wellness department to capture pertinent information. The associated process will be addressed in the related Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedures (PR-ST-10).
4.7.2 Inventory of Facilities and Services available for Reservation/Registration
4.7.2.1 Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services may require prior reservation, as announced by Sport and Wellness from time to time, and are subject to revision and change at the approval of Vice President, Finance and Administration.
4.7.2.2 Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services currently available for reservation are:
a) Sport and Wellness Facilities: Sport halls, Studios, Falcons Turf, Grass pitch, Cricket oval and batting cages, tennis/ padel courts, swimming pools (limited hours) and related value-add equipment options
b) Sport and Wellness Services: Sport and Wellness Programming, camps, academies and related value-ad service options.
4.7.3 Reservation and Usage Schedules and Options
4.7.3.1 Reservation and usage of Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services is offered to User Groups according to the schedule attached in Annex A, and further detailed in the related Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedures (PR-ST-10), subject to defined restrictions, fees, and usage requirements.
4.7.3.2 Registered Clients will be given the option of including Value ad Equipment or services to their reservations. These services and/or equipment requests may come as an additional cost that is added onto their total reservation fee. Such services are optional and dependent on availability and type of facility reserved or service requested.
4.8 Additional Usage Options
4.8.1 Invited Guest Passes
4.8.1.1 The following User Groups are eligible to acquire a Guest Pass, subject to reservation restrictions and requirements, Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services usage terms, and applicable fees, as further defined in the related Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedures (PR-ST-10):
a) Alumni are eligible to acquire their own personal Guest Pass and do not need to be invited by a member of the University Community.
b) Immediate Families of University Students and External Community Members invited as guests by members of the University Community.
4.9 Long Term Reservations
4.9.1 The University may consider a long-term arrangement with individuals and/or organizations which are considered to provide value and benefits to either Sport and Wellness or the University in general. Such arrangements are subject to the related Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedures (PR-ST-10).
5.0 Insurance and Legal Considerations
5.1 All Registered Clients of Sport and Wellness Facility and Services will be made aware of the limitations of Current University insurance coverage and will be encouraged (in some cases required) to provide additional coverage based upon direction from University insurance advisors.
5.2 Registered Clients must be required to view and indicate their consent with regard to applicable policies, procedures, and usage-specific agreements (i.e. waivers, release of liability, facility usage, photographic consent, individual privacy data protection and refund framework).
6.0 Financial Considerations
6.1 Fees
6.1.1 Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services usage fee structures are approved by the President, as part of the related Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedures (PR-ST-10), and must ensure at least full cost recovery and factoring current market comparisons for the same or similar facility use and services.
6.2 Billing
6.2.1 Payment for Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services usage and reservations, is subject to applicable University finance policies and procedures.
6.2.2 The billing process is managed and monitored by the Sport and Wellness department and is fully integrated with the University’s financial and online reservation system and the necessary steps to execute payment is mentioned in the related procedure [PR-ST-10] Sport and Wellness facilities and services usage procedures.
6.3 Deposits
6.3.1 Partial payment may be required to secure a longer-term reservation, registration or event utilizing Sport and Wellness facilities. The amount of such deposits will be at the discretion of the Sport and Wellness and dependent upon the nature of the request and the subsequent user profile.
6.3.2 Deposits may be mandatory when the nature of the request requires a significant expense outlay by the University in advance of the event or payment schedule.
6.4 Refunds
6.4.1 In the event Sport and Wellness cancel a reservation for any reason other than due to the misconduct of a Registered Client, an equivalent credit voucher will be provided to the reserving Registered Client or a full refund will be provided (utilizing the initial method of payment received) should the Registered Client desire same, subject to policies governing the refund of deposits, as per 6.4.4 below. Every effort will be made to minimize any disruption to reservation schedules and when required provide as much advance notice as possible to affected Registered Clients.
6.4.2 Reserving Registered Clients, who cancel their reservation more than 24 hours prior to a reserved time slot will be given an equivalent credit voucher or full refund (utilizing the initial method of payment received), subject to policies governing the refund of deposits, as per 6.4.4 below. The established 24-hour notice period is applied to ensure that valuable Sport and Wellness Facilities usage opportunities are not lost.
6.4.3 Subject to policies governing the refund of deposits, as per 6.4.4 below, when a reserving Registered Client cancels a reservation within 24 hours, they will be given an equivalent credit or full refund (utilizing the initial method of payment if the cancellation occurred due to extenuating circumstances, identified as having impacted the reserving Registered Client, as assessed by Sport and Wellness, in its sole discretion.
6.4.4 Deposits may be refundable if pre-determined, agreed upon requirements have been satisfied, as identified in a formalized and signed agreement or contract. Failure to comply with such requirements may result in the loss of full or portion of the deposit. In all other instances, deposits are non-refundable.
6.4.5 Long term reservations and University Partner arrangements which Sport and Wellness has determined require a deposit may be eligible for a full or partial deposit refund provided pre-determined requirements have been satisfied, as identified in a formalized and signed agreement or contract.
6.4.6 Refunds will be reviewed and processed in accordance with the applicable refund procedures.
7.0 Procedures
7.1 The Vice President, Student Affairs will ensure that procedures are developed and implemented in accordance with this policy.
8.0 Related Documents
8.1 PR-ST-10 Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services Usage Procedure
9.1 Annex A - Sport and Wellness Usage Overview (during Sport and Wellness
Operation Hours)
Tiers
Qualifying User Groups
Fees applied
Usage Capabilities
Time of Use
Tier 1
College Community; and Immediate Family of Academic Members and College's administrative staff
Free access to Sport and Wellness Facilities and Programming.
Some Wellness Services might be subject to College Community discounted fees.
S&W Facility Reservation Capabilities
Invite guests on Guest Passes. (Fees may be applicable for Guests)
Wellness Services registration capabilities.
Sport and Wellness Operation Hours using approved form of College identification.
Tier 2
Alumni
Discounted rate for self-applied Guest Pass.
Some Wellness Services might be subject to Alumni specific discounted fees.
Able to obtain a Self-applied Guest Pass
Selected Wellness Services registration capabilities.
Sport and Wellness Operation Hours with self-applied Guest Pass or Selected Wellness Services Registration.
Tier 3
Immediate Family of Students
Discounted rate for pre-invited Guest Pass.
Some Wellness Services might be subject to Immediate Family of Student discounted fees.
Requires a Guest Pass (Pre-invited by the College Student)
Selected Wellness Services registration capabilities.
Sport and Wellness Operation Hours on an invited Guest Pass or Selected Wellness Services Registration.
Tier 4
All External Community
Full Fees for pre-invited Guest Pass.
Some Wellness Services might be subject to standard discounted fees.
Requires a Guest Pass (Pre-invited by member of the College Community)
Selected Wellness Services registration capabilities.
Sport and Wellness Operation Hours on an invited Guest
Pass or Selected Wellness Services Registration.
AD HOC
Tier
College Partners
Dependent on the nature of facilities and/or services requested, as per the written agreement concluded for this purpose.
Able to use Sport and Wellness Facilities and Services during Operation Hours within in gaps/openings in existing student schedule, as per the written agreement concluded for this purpose.
Sport and Wellness Operation Hours as per written agreement concluded for this purposes.
Note: Occasionally, usage of above and below facilities and services may be impacted by University events and
activities which may not allow for regular usage for the above user groups.
9.2 Annex B - Sport and Wellness Usage Overview (during Extended Community
Access Hours)
Tiers
Qualifying User Groups
Fees applied
Usage Capabilities
Time of Use
Tier 1
College Community: Students, Academic and Administrative Staff and Immediate Family of Academic Members and College's administrative staff.
Standard Facility Reservation Rates Apply.
Service registration fees may apply, in which case rates will be discounted.
S&W Facility Reservation Capabilities
Able to register for various S&W Services
First Come, First Serve Basis.
Sport and Wellness Extended Community Access Hours
Tier 2
Alumni
Standard Facility Reservation Rates Apply.
Service registration fees may apply, in which case rates will be discounted.
S&W Facility Reservation Capabilities
Able to register for various S&W Services
First Come, First Serve Basis.
Sport and Wellness Extended Community Access Hours
Tier 3
Immediate Family of Students
Standard Facility Reservation Rates Apply.
Service registration fees may apply, in which case rates will be discounted.
S&W Facility Reservation Capabilities
Able to register for various S&W Services
First Come, First Serve Basis.
Sport and Wellness Extended Community Access Hours
Tier 4
All External Community
Standard Facility Reservation Rates Apply.
Service registration fees may apply.
S&W Facility Reservation Capabilities
Able to register for various S&W Services
First Come, First Serve Basis.
Sport and Wellness Extended Community Access Hours
AD HOC
Tier
College Partners
Dependent on the nature of facilities and/or services requested, as per the written agreement concluded for this purpose.
Access and Facility usage is subject to reservation capabilities, and terms of the agreement.
Sport and Wellness Extended Community Access Hours
PL-ST-10: Sport and Wellness Facility Usage Policy ©
November 2020