STUDENT COUNSELLING SERVICES POLICY
STUDENT COUNSELLING SERVICES POLICY
1.0 Definitions
1.1 The following words and expressions have the meaning hereby assigned to them:
1.1.1
Academic Members
: Faculty Members and Instructional Members.
1.1.2
At-Risk Mental Health Crisis
: A mental health crisis in which a Student is in danger of harming one-self or others, of being harmed, or dying, and may, depending on severity, require intensive intervention services.
1.1.3
Counselling
: Professional guidance of the individual by utilizing psychological methods especially in collecting case history data and using various techniques of personal interviewing.
1.1.4
Course
: A set of Learning Sessions in a particular subject, with a defined scope and duration, and specific learning outcomes.
1.1.5
Credit
: A unit of measurement assigned to a Course based on the total amount of learning time that counts toward a Program or credential completion, at a particular level of the Qatar National Qualification Framework.
1.1.6
Crisis-Intervention
: Short-term management technique designed to reduce potential permanent damage to an individual affected by a Crisis.
1.1.7
Mental Health
: A state of well-being in which every individual realizes his or her own potential, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and is able to make a contribution to her or his community.
1.1.8
Personal Crisis
: An overwhelming event, which can include divorce, violence, the passing of a loved one, or the discovery of a serious illness.
1.1.9
Program
: A prescribed set of Courses leading to a qualification, including a Certificate, Diploma (2 years), Advanced Diploma (3 years), Bachelor, Master, or Doctorate, according to the Qatar National Qualifications Framework.
1.1.10
Referral
: An act of referring someone or something for consultation, review, or further mental health assessment.
1.1.11
Self-Harm
: Deliberate injury to oneself, typically as a manifestation of a psychological or psychiatric disorder.
1.1.12
Staff
: Person(s) employed by or working at the University as Academic Members or providing administrative support.
1.1.13
Student
: A person who is presently enrolled at the University in a Credit Course or who is designated by the University as a Student.
1.1.14
University
: University of Doha for Science and Technology established by Emiri Resolution No. 13 of 2022.
1.2 Where the context requires, words importing the singular shall include the plural and vice-versa.
1.3 Where a word or phrase is given a particular meaning, other parts of speech and grammatical forms of that word or phrase have corresponding meanings.
2.0 Policy Purpose
2.1 University of Doha for Science and Technology will undertake to protect and promote good Mental Health and well-being among its Students, the provisions that will be made for individual support in this area, and will detail the parameters within which these services will operate.
3.0 Policy Scope
This policy applies to:
3.1.1 Student Affairs Division;
3.1.2 Student Success and Counselling Department;
3.1.3 Students;
3.1.4 Academic Members.
4.0 Policy Statement
This policy is written in accordance with the right of patients with mental illness, as per Law No. 16 of 2016 for Mental Health.
4.1 The University recognizes its responsibilities in relation to promoting positive Mental Health, and supporting Students with Mental Health difficulties, and adopts a proactive, student-centered approach.
4.2 Student Success and Counselling Department works to:
4.2.1 Provide support to Students experiencing Mental Health challenges, emotional upset, trauma or personal crisis;
4.2.2 Promote positive Mental Health to all Students and offer opportunities for Students to learn more about Mental Health and well-being will form a core part of the Counselling's work.
4.3 Mental Health, Well-being, and Counselling support within the University works to complement statutory psychiatric, Mental Health and Counselling services and not to duplicate or replace them.
5.0 Referral Options
5.1 Counselling may be offered to Students through:
5.1.1 A Referral from Academic Members; or
5.1.2 Self-Referral basis.
6.0 Counselling Services
6.1 Services of the Student Counselling Specialist Team include the following, and are provided in accordance with the relevant procedures:
6.1.1 One-to-one therapeutic Counselling by appointment.
6.1.2 Services are offered free to all enrolled Students.
6.1.3 Daily drop-in sessions for Students wanting to see a Counsellor at short notice and for a short time.
6.1.4 Mediation between Students.
6.1.5 Student experiencing a Crisis.
6.1.6 Consultations with Staff to support them in their work with Students.
6.1.7 Workshops for Students on various topics such as anger management, self-esteem and problem-solving.
6.1.8 Outreach: University Counselors may provide workshops and presentations to Students, and Staff, on Counselling services, Mental Health and related issues.
6.1.9 Support or advise Vice-President, Student Affairs on a Student’s fitness to study at the University in accordance with applicable legislations, and University policies and procedures.
6.1.10 Any other services approved by the President, falling within the mandate of the Counselling section.
6.2 Counselling Services may be mandated for Students by the University in some instances, on a case-by-case basis.
6.3 A Counselor, who is in a Counselling relationship with a Student, has an ethical and legal obligation to keep information contained within that relationship. Exceptions to confidentiality exist, and Students should be informed when situations arise in which Counselors have a responsibility to disclose information obtained in Counselling relationships to others, to protect Students, themselves, or other individuals.
7.0 Referrals
7.1 Counsellors make Referrals when necessary or appropriate to outside resources for Student and family support.
8.0 Maintenance and Security of Student Records
8.1 Systematic case records must be maintained electronically for Students seen for Counselling services, including all pertinent clinical documentation such as assessment, case notes, termination summary, results of standardized assessment, etc. Student Counselling records are archived 5 years post-graduation.
8.2 Confidentiality and appropriate handling of information and records must be reflected in the collection, classification, and maintenance of Student information, and must be done in accordance with applicable legislations, and University policies and procedures.
9.0 Signed Release of Information
9.1 A signed Release of Information should be obtained from the Student when contacts are to be made with any other person or agency outside or inside the University, as required by law.
10.0 Statement of Confidentiality
10.1 All services are offered on a confidential basis. However, confidentiality may be broken, subject to relevant procedures, if a member of the Student Counselling Specialist Team deems that this is essential for the safety and well-being of the Student and/or another person, or for legal compliance.
11.0 Termination of Treatment
11.1 Termination of Counselling services must be a joint decision between Student and Counselor with respect to the Student’s autonomy. Counselors may terminate the service when:
11.1.1 Therapeutic goals have been achieved.
11.1.2 Student misses 4 consecutive appointments or makes 4 consecutive cancelations.
11.1.3 A Referral is made to another provider outside the University.
11.1.4 Student has left the University.
12.0 Complaint / Grievance
12.1 If a Student has a complaint or grievance about a counselor, consultant or an employee of Student Counseling Services, he or she should direct their concerns to the Manager of Student Counselling Services or the Manager of Student Engagement.
13.0 Procedures
13.1 The Vice-President, Student Affairs will ensure that procedures are developed for the implementation of this policy.
14.0 Relevant Legislation
14.1 Law No. 16 of 2016 - Rights of Patients with Mental Illness
14.2 Law No. 13 of 2016 - Protection of Personal Data
15.0 Related Documents
PL-ST-16: Student Counselling Services Policy
March 2023